Run Kubernetes Clusters for Less with Amazon EC2 Spot and Karpenter (#691)
build-on-aws/content: tutorials/run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter/index.md

|-----|

One of the main cost factors for Kubernetes clusters relies on the compute layer for the data plane. Running Kubernetes clusters on Amazon EC2 Spot instances are a great way to reduce your compute costs significantly. When using Spot instances, you can get up to a 90% price discount compared to On-Demand Instances. 

Spot is a great match for workloads that are stateless, fault-tolerant, and flexible applications such as big data, containerized workloads, CI/CD, web servers, high-performance computing (HPC), and test & development workloads. Containers often match with these characteristics as they’re Spot-friendly. For non Spot-friendly workloads, like stateful applications within your cluster, you can continue using On-Demand Instances.

To optimize data place capacity further, you can adjust the number of nodes when pods are unscheduable due to available capacity, or remove nodes when they’re no longer needed. For automatic nodes adjustment, use either [Cluster Autoscaler (CA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/cluster-autoscaler) or [Karpenter](https://karpenter.sh/). Both tools have support for Spot, and in this tutorial I’ll focus on Karpenter.

> In this tutorial, I’ll guide you on the steps you need to follow to configure an EKS cluster with Spot instances and Karpenter. Additionally, I’ll show you how to configure a workload to see Karpenter in action by provisioning the required capacity using Spot instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I’ll guide you on the steps you need to follow to configure an EKS cluster with Spot instances and Karpenter. Additionally, I’ll show you how to configure a workload to see Karpenter in action by provisioning the required capacity using Spot instances.
```

> 💡 Tip: Karpenter simplifies the data plane capacity management using an approach called **group-less auto scaling**. This is because Karpenter is no longer using node groups, which matches with [Auto Scaling groups](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/ec2/userguide/AutoScalingGroup.html?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq), to launch nodes. Over time, clusters using the paradigm of running different types of applications (that require different capacity types), end up with a complex configuration and operational model where node groups must be defined and provided in advance.

> You need to create two environment variables we’ll use next, the values you need can be obtained from the Terraform output variables. Make sure you’re in the same folder where the Terraform `main.tf` file lives and run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to create two environment variables that we’ll use next, the values you need can be obtained from the Terraform output variables. Make sure you’re in the same folder where the Terraform `main.tf` file lives and run the following command:
```

* `ttlSecondsUntilExpired`: Here’s where you define when a node will be deleted. This is useful to force new nodes with up-to-date AMI’s. In this example we have set the value to 7 days.
* `providerRef`: This is where you reference the template to launch a node. An `AWSNodeTemplate` is where you define which subnets, security groups, and IAM role the nodes will use. You can set node tags or even configure a [user-data](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/user-data.html?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq). To learn more about which other configurations are available, go [here](https://karpenter.sh/docs/concepts/node-templates/).

> You can learn more about which other configuration properties are available for a `Provisioner` [here](https://karpenter.sh/docs/concepts/provisioners/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also learn more about which other configuration properties are available for a `Provisioner` [here](https://karpenter.sh/docs/concepts/provisioners/).
```

> ### Why it is a good practice to configure a diverse set of instance types?

Reviewer 2: 3 # is fine, since it's nested under step 3. For the title, we can still do title case, but we should make it actually interrogative: "Why Is It a Good Practice to...?"

2023-08-25T10:10:23.976Z    INFO    controller.machine.lifecycle    launched machine    {"commit": "34d50bf-dirty", "machine": "default-zx45m", "provisioner": "default", "provider-id": "aws:///eu-west-1b/i-0f89c0a89d0a78ae7", "instance-type": "m5.2xlarge", "zone": "eu-west-1b", "capacity-type": "spot", "allocatable": {"cpu":"7910m","ephemeral-storage":"17Gi","memory":"29317Mi","pods":"58"}}
```

By reading the logs, you can see that Karpenter:

* Noticed there were 10 pending pods, and decided that can fit all pods in only one node.
* Is considering the kubelet and kube-proxy `Daemonsets` (2 additional pods), and it’s aggregating all resources need for 12 pods. Moreover, Karpenter noticed that 100 instance types match these requirements.
* Launched an `m5.2xlarge` Spot Instance in `eu-west-1b` as this was the pool with more spare capacity with lowest price.

## Step 5: Spread Pods Within Multiple AZs

> Karpenter launched only one node for all pending pods. However, putting all eggs in the same basket is not recommended as if you lose that node, you’ll need to wait for Karpenter to provision a replacement node (which can be fast, but still, you’ll have an impact). To avoid this, and make the workload more highly-available, let’s spread the pods within multiple AZs. To do so, let’s configure a [Topology Spread Constraint](https://karpenter.sh/docs/concepts/scheduling/#topology-spread) within the `Deployment`. To do so, add the following snippet within the `Deployment` spec block (after the `nodeSelector` block) you deployed in the previous step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Karpenter launched only one node for all pending pods. However, putting all eggs in the same basket is not recommended as if you lose that node, you’ll need to wait for Karpenter to provision a replacement node (which can be fast, but still, you’ll have an impact). To avoid this, and make the workload more highly available, let’s spread the pods within multiple AZs. Let’s configure a [Topology Spread Constraint](https://karpenter.sh/docs/concepts/scheduling/#topology-spread) within the `Deployment`. To do so, add the following snippet within the `Deployment` spec block (after the `nodeSelector` block) you deployed in the previous step:
```

---
title: "Run Kubernetes Clusters for Less with Amazon EC2 Spot and Karpenter"
description: "Learn how to run Kubernetes clusters for up to 90% off with Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS), Amazon EC2 Spot Instances and Karpenter in less than 45 minutes."
tags:
  - cost-optimization
  - kubernetes
  - karpenter
  - infrastructure-as-code
  - terraform
  - eks  
  - spot  
  - tutorials
  - compute
  - devops
spaces:
  - cost-optimization
  - kubernetes
  - devops
waves:
  - cost
authorGithubAlias: chrismld
authorName: Christian Melendez
date: 2023-09-10
---
| ToC |
|-----|

> One of the main cost factors for Kubernetes clusters relies on the compute layer for the data plane. Running Kubernetes clusters on Amazon EC2 Spot instances are a great way to start reducing your compute costs significantly. When using Spot instances, you can get up to a 90% price discount compared to On-Demand prices. Spot is a great match for workloads that are stateless, fault-tolerant, and flexible applications such as big data, containerized workloads, CI/CD, web servers, high-performance computing (HPC), and test & development workloads. Containers often match with these characteristics, they’re Spot-friendly. For non Spot-friendly workloads like stateful applications within your cluster, you can continue using On-Demand instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main cost factors for Kubernetes clusters relies on the compute layer for the data plane. Running Kubernetes clusters on Amazon EC2 Spot instances are a great way to reduce your compute costs significantly. When using Spot instances, you can get up to a 90% price discount compared to On-Demand Instances. 

Spot is a great match for workloads that are stateless, fault-tolerant, and flexible applications such as big data, containerized workloads, CI/CD, web servers, high-performance computing (HPC), and test & development workloads. Containers often match with these characteristics as they’re Spot-friendly. For non Spot-friendly workloads, like stateful applications within your cluster, you can continue using On-Demand Instances.
```

> To optimize data place capacity further, you can adjust the number of nodes you need when pods are unscheduable due to available capacity, or remove nodes when they’re no longer needed. To do this nodes adjustment automatically, I recommend you using either [Cluster Autoscaler (CA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/cluster-autoscaler) or [Karpenter](https://karpenter.sh/). Both tools have support for Spot, and in this tutorial I’ll focus on Karpenter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To optimize data place capacity further, you can adjust the number of nodes you need when pods are unscheduable due to available capacity, or remove nodes when they’re no longer needed. For automatic nodes adjustment, use either [Cluster Autoscaler (CA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/cluster-autoscaler) or [Karpenter](https://karpenter.sh/). Both tools have support for Spot, and in this tutorial I’ll focus on Karpenter.
```

## Why go with Karpenter?

Karpenter is an open-source node provisioning project built for Kubernetes. As new pods continue coming to your cluster, either because you increased the number of replicas manually or through an [HPA](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/) policy or a [KEDA](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/mt/proactive-autoscaling-kubernetes-workloads-keda-metrics-ingested-into-aws-amp/?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq) event, at some point your data plane nodes will be at full capacity, causing you to have pending (unschedulable) pods. The Karpenter controller reacts to this problem, and aggregates the capacity of these pending pods by evaluating scheduling constraints (resource requests, nodeselectors, affinities, tolerations, and topology spread constraints). Then, Karpenter provisions the right nodes that meet the requirements of these pending pods.

> One of the main advantages of using Karpenter is the simplicity of configuring Spot best practices like instance type diversification (multiple families, sizes, generations, etc) in what Karpenter calls a provisioner. If you’re getting started with Spot in Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) or are struggling with the complexity of configuring multiple node groups, I recommend you to use Karpenter. However, if you’re already using CA and want to start spending less, you can find the detailed configuration to use Spot with CA [here](https://aws.amazon.com/tutorials/amazon-eks-with-spot-instances/?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main advantages of using Karpenter is the simplicity of configuring Spot best practices like instance type diversification (multiple families, sizes, generations, etc) in what Karpenter calls a provisioner. If you’re getting started with Spot in Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) or are struggling with the complexity of configuring multiple node groups, I recommend using Karpenter. However, if you’re already using CA and want to start spending less, you can find the detailed configuration to use Spot with CA [here](https://aws.amazon.com/tutorials/amazon-eks-with-spot-instances/?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq).
```

| 🧩 Prerequisites    | - [AWS Account](https://aws.amazon.com/resources/create-account/?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq)<br>- [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq) <br> - [Kubernetes CLI (kubectl)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-linux/)<br> - [Terraform CLI](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)<br> - [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/)<br> |
| 📢 Feedback            | <a href="https://pulse.buildon.aws/survey/DEM0H5VW" target="_blank">Any feedback, issues, or just a</a> 👍 / 👎 ?    |
| 💾 Code                | [Download the code](https://github.com/build-on-aws/run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter) |
| ⏰ Last Updated        | 2023-09-10                                                     |

## Pre-Requisites

> * Access to an AWS account with required IAM permissions. The IAM security principal that you're using must have permissions to create an EKS cluster, and an AWS Cloud9 environment if you're planning to use it to run all commands listed in this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You need access to an AWS account with IAM permissions to create an EKS cluster, and an AWS Cloud9 environment if you're planning to use it to run all commands listed in this tutorial.
```

* Install and configure the [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq)
* Install the [Kubernetes CLI (kubectl)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-linux/)
* Install the [Terraform CLI](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)
* Install Helm ([the package manager for Kubernetes](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/))

## Step 1: Create a Cloud9 environment

> 💡 Tip: You can skip this step if you already have a Cloud9 environment or if you’re planning to run all steps on your own computer. Just make sure you have the proper permissions listed in the pre-requisites section of this tutorial.

> To get started quickly I’ve prepared an AWS CloudFormation template to create a Cloud9 environment with all the tools you’re going to need to follow this tutorial like kubectl and Terraform CLI. Let’s create the Cloud9 environment running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I’ve prepared an AWS CloudFormation template to create a Cloud9 environment. It has all the tools to follow this tutorial like kubectl and Terraform CLI. Now, let’s create the Cloud9 environment running the following command:
```

```bash
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/build-on-aws/run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter/main/cloud9-cnf.yaml
aws cloudformation deploy --stack-name EKSKarpenterCloud9 --template-file cloud9-cnf.yaml --capabilities "CAPABILITY_IAM"
```

> You need to wait around five to ten minutes after CloudFormation finishes, then open the [Cloud9 console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloud9control/home?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq) and open the environment. From now own, you’ll be running all commands in this tutorial in the [Cloud9 terminal](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloud9/latest/user-guide/tour-ide.html#tour-ide-terminal?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wait 5-10 minutes after CloudFormation finishes, then open the [Cloud9 console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloud9control/home?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq) and open the environment. From now own, you’ll be running all commands in this tutorial in the [Cloud9 terminal](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloud9/latest/user-guide/tour-ide.html#tour-ide-terminal?sc_channel=el&sc_campaign=costwave&sc_content=run-kubernetes-clusters-for-less-with-amazon-ec2-spot-and-karpenter&sc_geo=mult&sc_country=mult&sc_outcome=acq).
```

Cloud9 normally manages IAM credentials dynamically. This isn’t currently compatible with the EKS IAM authentication, so you need to disable it and rely on the IAM role instead. To do so, run the following commands in the Cloud9 terminal:

```bash
aws cloud9 update-environment --environment-id ${C9_PID} --managed-credentials-action DISABLE
rm -vf ${HOME}/.aws/credentials
```

> To confirm that you have all the CLI tools needed for this tutorial, run the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To confirm that you have all the CLI tools needed for this tutorial, input these commands:
```

> ---

Reviewer: Note to author:

Good job! It has nice structure and is packed with great info. I ironed out some grammatical hiccups, shortened sentences and suggested rewrites that eliminate redundancy or jargon.

> title: "Run Kubernetes Clusters for Less with Amazon EC2 Spot and Karpenter"

Reviewer: ```Consider rewrite to "hook" reader:
title: "Run Kubernetes Clusters for 90% Off With Amazon EC2 Spot and Karpenter"
```

> description: "Learn how to run Kubernetes clusters for up to 90% off with Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS), Amazon EC2 Spot Instances and Karpenter in less than 45 minutes."

Reviewer: ```Consider rewrite to shorten and eliminate redundancy from title
description: 
```"Save time too: it only take 45 minutes to configure your EKS clusters."

tags:

>   - cost-optimization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - cost-optimization
```Delete as we can only keep 5 and this is a general term

  - kubernetes
  - karpenter

>   - infrastructure-as-code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - infrastructure-as-code
```Delete as we can only keep 5 and this is a general term

  - terraform
  - eks  
  - spot  

>   - tutorials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - tutorials
```Delete as we can only keep 5 and this is a general keyword

>   - tutorials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - tutorials
```Delete as we can only keep 5 and this is a general keyword

>   - compute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - compute
```Delete as we can only keep 5 and this is a general keyword

>   - compute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - compute
```Delete as we can only keep 5 and this is a general keyword

>   - devops

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - devops
```Delete as we can only keep 5 and this is a general keyword
